ReleaseNotes.txt
----------------


------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Copyright 2006 - 2010
THE REGENTS OF THE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

The software and supporting documentation was developed by the

         Digital Image Processing Laboratory
         Department of Radiology
         University of Michigan
         1500 East Medical Center Dr.
         Ann Arbor, MI 48109

It is funded in part by DHHS/NIH/NCI 1 U01 CA91099-01.

IT IS THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE USER TO CONFIGURE AND/OR MODIFY THE SOFTWARE TO PERFORM THE 
OPERATIONS THAT ARE REQUIRED BY THE USER.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED AS IS, WITHOUT REPRESENTATION FROM THE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN AS 
TO ITS FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE, AND WITHOUT WARRANTY BY THE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN OF ANY 
KIND, EITHER EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. THE REGENTS OF THE UNIVERSITY OF 
MICHIGAN SHALL NOT BE LIABLE FOR ANY DAMAGES, INCLUDING SPECIAL, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, 
OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES, WITH RESPECT TO ANY CLAIM ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH 
THE USE OF THE SOFTWARE, EVEN IF IT HAS BEEN OR IS HEREAFTER ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY 
OF SUCH DAMAGES.

PERMISSION IS GRANTED TO USE, COPY, CREATE DERIVATIVE WORKS AND REDISTRIBUTE THIS SOFTWARE 
AND SUCH DERIVATIVE WORKS FOR ANY PURPOSE, SO LONG AS THIS ENTIRE COPYRIGHT NOTICE, 
INCLUDING THE GRANT OF PERMISSION, AND DISCLAIMERS, APPEAR IN ALL COPIES MADE; AND SO LONG 
AS THE NAME OF THE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN IS NOT USED IN ANY ADVERTISING OR PUBLICITY 
PERTAINING TO THE USE OR DISTRIBUTION OF THIS SOFTWARE WITHOUT SPECIFIC, WRITTEN PRIOR 
AUTHORIZATION.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


MAX V1.07 - max-V107.pl

--------------------------------

This release of MAX continues its development, fixes some bugs, and adds a number of features.
The reason for this release is to make MAX available to NCI/CIP. The following is a list of
changes in this version in approximate order of relevance and importance.


    Compute various volume measures; write-out to the <VolumeMeasures> tag section in the pmap XML
      file. Because of this addition, bump VERSIONPMAPXML to 2.01.
    
    Parse <StudyInstanceUID> from <ResponseHeader> for inclusion in <DataInfoHeader> according to
      NCI's (MIRC's) needs.
    
    Add function modify_reader_id to make anonymized reader names distinctive. Requested by Qinyan
      Pan for AIM conversion.
    
    Modify sub approxeq to work-around a divide-by-zero error.
    
    Check to be sure we have an even number of readers for pmap median volume calculations; add
      message ID 5406.
    
    Add code to check that the beginning and ending pixel coords are equal for each ROI.
      Convert FATAL[6409] to ERROR[5407]. Add a connectivity check between the 1st and last points
      to detect a gap (ERROR [5408]).
    
    Resolve confusion concerning what message ID 6408: Change its label from "INFO" to "FATAL".


--------------------------------


MAX V1.06 - max-V106.pl
28 February 2008

This release of MAX continues its development, fixes some bugs, and adds a number of features --
namely ambiguity processing, QA error checking, and many changes related to user messages.  The 
following is a list of important changes in this version in approximate order of relevance and
importance.


    Fix for a bug apparently introduced in V1.05: A nodule (large or small) that matches
      nothing else should be assigned its own SNID; such an SNID would have only one constituent
      nodule. V1.05 disregards this case and does not assign an SNID to these solitary nodules.
      (announced in an email dated 11/8/2007)
    
    Disable non-nodule intra-reader proximity check by default since non-nodules being close
      is for a given reader is reality -- not an error.  Can enable this by giving
      --qa-ops=nonnodprox on the command line.  (Non-nodule intra-reader proximity is message ID
      4511.)
    
    Add a new --xml-ops value: cxrrequest.  Triggers the writing of an XML file that is used
      to form the CXR request.  It consists mainly of the sections for all large nodules along
      with other tags according to the CXR request schema.
    
    Enhance sub check_for_narrow_contour: Re-wrote it to detect overlapping pixels as a
      separate check.  Add NARROWNESSSEARCHOFFSET to Site_Max for use by this sub.  Break msg ID
      4408 out into 4409 & 4410 for separate and detailed notification of narrow and overlapping
      portions, respectively; the notification includes coordinate x & y values in such a way
      that they can be easily parsed for automated handling of these warnings.
    
    Add code to sub simple_matching to check for intra-reader overlap of large nodules:
      message ID = 5504.
    
    Add code to check for consistency of read type and message type between command line
      options (and/or defaults) and XML file content.  Elevate message ID 3402 from warning to
      fatal error (ID=6408).  Add message ID 6407.
    
    Add code to handle the case where no markings of any kind are found.
    
    Re-work the code that checks and processes the characteristics data, including improved
      error checking (message IDs 5402, 5403, 5404 & 5405).
    
    Add code to filter certain user messages:
    
      * Eliminate repetitious, symmetrical messages that warn of proximity between various
      combinations of small and non-nodules: If we say that A is too close to B, we don't need 
      to say that B is too close to A.  See message IDs 4509, 4510 & 4511.
    
      * This one is not fully implemented: Eliminate repetitious messages about exclusion 
      pixels without corresponding inclusion pixels (ID 4505).
    
    Clarify the text in user messages 6303, 6306, 6307, 6308, 6311, 6312, and 6315.  Modified
      ID 3109 slightly.
    
    Added user messages 3110 & 3201; store these in the messages file.
    
    Add z coord (in mm.) to messages 4509, 4510, & 4511.
    
    Add code for --add-suffix.
    
    Add code to prepend the contents of the environmental variable MAXOPTS to the command line
      options.
    
    Added an interrupt (control-C) handler: see sub interrupt_handler.
    
    Add code to insert any comments specified via --comments into the message log.
    
    Improve the plotting routines: sub simpleplot.
    
    Modified the code for handling --early-exit values: Shortened forms are acceptable.
    
    Minor re-writes of some text to stdout.


The added command line options are described in the in-line help.

A number of small utilities (getfiles.sh, get_image_geom-V201.pl, and getpix.sh) are included.
These serve as examples of how you may wish to obtain pixel size, slice spacing, and a list of
the files to process.  They are intended to be executed on the command line via the backtick
method available in most common shells.

Note that there is a new version of get_image_geom.pl: V2.01.  It includes the added capability
of getting pixel dimension & slice spacing args & values from a file named image_geom.args which
should be located (1) in the same directory with the images and the .flis (specific to UofM)
file or (2) in max/ or (3) under the directory named by $startdir.  This is useful in case pixel
dimension and/or slice spacing cannot be obtained automatically; in this case, they can be
pre-loaded in the image_geom.args file instead.


--------------------------------


MAX - max-V105.pl - V1.05
2 May 2007

This release of MAX continues its development, fixes some bugs, and adds a number of features --
namely ambiguity processing, QA error checking, and many changes related to user messages.  The 
following is a list of important changes in this version in approximate order of relevance and
importance.  (See also the addendum below.)

    Implement the "ambiguity set" concept (replaces "ambiguity pair").  Add code to discern 
      ambiguity type.  Change the XML accordingly.
    Implement the new version of QA error #6.
    Add a subroutine to check for region connectivity.
    Add a subroutine to check for narrow contour sections.
    Add code to keep track of non-matched non-nodules so that they can be listed separately in 
      the XML.
    Change the time and date attributes of the <RunInfo> tag to be consistent with time & date
      tags in other XML files.
    Add a number of command line options (--internaldoc, --file-in-pattern, and
      --show-slice-spacing-messages), new values for --quality-assurance-ops, and a number of 
      command option aliases.
    Add a number of user messages and changes the severity level of some existing ones.
    Rename PNID to SNID ("physical nodule ID" to "series nodule ID") inthe code, messages, and
      XML.

The added command line options are described in the in-line help.

A new document, "MAX Addendum to LIDC QA", is included, along with V1.8 of Sam Armato's QA
document -- both in PDF format.  Neither the developer's guide nor the specification document
have been updated recently and thus are not included in this distribution.

A number of small utilities (getfiles.sh, get_image_geom-V200.pl, and getpix.sh) are included.
These serve as examples of how you may wish to obtain pixel size, slice spacing, and a list of
the files to process.  They are intended to be executed on the command line via the backtick
method available in most common shells.

Addendum:
6 July, 2009

The following changes were omitted from the list above:

    Eliminate the <Location> tag and move the location info into the <Object> tag in the
      matching XML file.
    Add the hostname to the "header" lines of the XML files.


--------------------------------


MAX - max-V104.pl - V1.04
30 June 2006

This release of MAX continues its development, fixes some bugs, and adds a number of features.  
The following is a list of important changes in this version in approximate order of relevance/
importance.

    Bug fixes were made in code related to Z coordinate processing (filling the %z2siu hash and 
      replace a constant in the call to sub approxeq).
    Implement code that checks for QA error #6.  This is still somewhat preliminary but should be
      usable.  See the developer's guide for usage suggestions.  Remove the code that forces an exit
      on blinded reads: We need to be able to do matching on blinded reads in order to implement QA
      #6.
    Add the <Location...> tag in matching.xml (gives x,y,z location of small nodules and non-nodules
      and is paired with the <Object...> tag in the <Matching> section).
    Add the --message-type option.
    Add an informational termination message (ID=3101) to the END block.
    Re-do user messages (mostly error messages) to use the standard reporting mechanism.  Command
      line errors continue *not* to use this facility.  Most other messages go to the messages file
      so that they can be processed in the case where we run MAX in unattended mode.
    Adjust verbosity levels on many error messages.
    Convert msg id 4404 (inconsistent read type) to 3402.
    Expand the code that extracts valid values for --action, --test, --xmlops, etc. for display
      in the --internals section.
    If --z-analyze is present, disable matching and pmap XML generation and skip the requirement for
      --pixel-size.
    Add aliases for --action: --exit-early, --forced-exit
    Minor reformatting was made to some stdout output, and edits were made to the in-line help text.

The added command line options are described in the in-line help.

A new document, the developer's guide, is available for download, as well as an updated version
of the specification document.  Note, however, that the spec doc has not been updated to include
descriptions of the new QA-related algorithms.


--------------------------------


MAX - max-V104b1.pl - V1.04b1
27 June 2006

This is a beta release for Univ. of Chicago for QA purposes.  Regular release notes have not been
written.  Refer instead for the Revision History block.  Development will continue on V1.04 
pending results from UC's trials.


--------------------------------


MAX - max-V103.pl - V1.03
13 June 2006

This release of MAX continues its development, fixes some bugs, and adds a number of
features.  The following is a list of important changes in this version in approximate order of
relevance/importance.

    Augment the non-nodule ID renaming code to prepend NN for IDs consisting of small integers.
      (This was previously sent out to the sites as a patch.)  This solution is not robust but
      is probably OK under the circumstances.
    Change ZSPACINGTOLFILLIN in Site_Max from 0.001 to 0.0001.  (This was previously sent out to
      the sites as an advisory.)
    Add the SOP instance UID to pmap.xml (in the <Slice> tag).
    Add code to write pmap XML data only for non-null pmaps; that is, skip the pmap XML 
      creation for a pmap if the PNID of the pmap only contains small nodules.
    Add "use FindBin;".
    Add code to detect too few points in an ROI; see message IDs 3401 and 4403.
    Clarify the text of various messages as well as text sent to stdout.
    Add code for use in implementing checking for QA error #7.  The code in this version is
      preliminary and will be developed further in later versions.
    Change --save-data-structures to accept a list of values.
    Add the --quality-assurance option.
    Add the --dir-save option.
    Add comments fo show where Unix/Linux utilities are used: "#@@@ Code location: UnixUtil-"
    Modify code that sets $rundatetime *not* to use the Unix date utility.

The added command line options are described in the in-line help.


--------------------------------


MAX - max-V102.pl - V1.02
27 April 2006

(This is a corrected version of the release notes that added several lines to the "changes"
section below.)

This release of MAX continues its development, fixes some bugs, and adds a number of
features.  The following is a list of important changes in this version.

    Add code to check whether a reader marks a small nodule whose sphere overlaps with a non-nodule.
    Fix a bug in the code that wrote-out the ambiguity XML that was causing too many lines to be
      written.
    Add the --comments option.
    Add additional command line option aliases for naming consistency.
    Add code to warn if too few edgemap points are found in an inclusion ROI.
    Overhaul the user message system (for error, warning, and info messages).
    Add the --savemessages option: writes selected user messages to a file whose name is
      defined in Site_Max as messages.txt.
    Add user message info to the "internals" section (--internals).
    Implement a number of fairly minor changes to the XML files produced by MAX.
    Make a backup of an XML output file only if it has size > 0 (so that we don't needlessly
      wipe-out an existing backup file with a zero-length one).
    Disable the writing of all XML files if we are validating.  (Formerly, matching.xml wasn't
      written but pmap.xml was due to some missing logic.)
    Add code locator "tags" in the code to aid in coordinating with the spec doc.  For
      example,
          #@@@ Code location: A47
      where the "#" must be in column 1, spaces are exactly as shown, and the label ("A47" in this
      example) can be anything.
    Change behavior for blinded data: Don't explicitly force an exit at the end of pass 1; instead,
      exit by default after centroid calculations (which is just before matching) (unless forced
      to exit earlier by --action).
    Add additional command line option aliases for naming consistency.
    Eliminate the creation of plotmsgs.txt.
    Remove the "longest diameter" code.  A special version of MAX has been split-off that retains
      this functionality.
    Remove all code related to AVS field creation.
    Update the in-line help.
    
The added command line options are described in the in-line help.

New in this distro: MAX-SpecDoc-V1prelim.pdf, the preliminary version of a specification document
for MAX.


-------------------------------


MAX - max.pl - V1.01
10 April 2006

This release of MAX continues its development, fixes some bugs, and adds a number of
features.  The following is a list of important differences between this and the previous
version:

    Improve error handling and messages to the user.
    Demote some fatal errors to warnings or to non-fatal errors.
    Add code to deal with missing tags in the NIH (anonymized) version of the data.
    Re-work much of the XML generation code for matching results and pmaps.  (The marking 
      history XML file is not yet implemented.)
    Augment the in-line help text that describes how the XML input files are identified, etc.
    Add the --skipnumfilescheck option.
    Add the --dirin (--dirname is an alias with this) and --dirout command line options.  
      Defaults are set in Site_Max.
    Re-work the --xmlops & --pmapops options: Implement defaults and add some code to show 
      results of processing these options.
    Get default for --sphere-diam from VIRTSPHEREDEFDIAM (in SiteMax).
    Add the --zanalyze option (only rudimentary "analysis" is done at this point).
    Add Site_Max to the constants display part of the --internals option.
    Convert @contours to %contours to get around memory problems with large datasets.  This 
      also makes MAX run much faster.

The added command line options are described in the in-line help.


-------------------------------


MAX - max.pl - V1.00
9 March 2006

This is the first release of MAX - Multipurpose Application for Xml - for use by the LIDC
Implementation Group.  It implements virtually all functions defined at the current time except
for the following: the XML file that records marking history is incomplete in this version, and
the XML schema for pmaps and matching are preliminary; this will be corrected in an upcoming
version.

MAX consists of two files: max.pl and Site_Max.pm.  They can be placed in any directory that is
accessible to your users.  The Perl environment for MAX should be setup according to information
in a previous archive, TestSetup, which was made available to all sites via the Wiki.

MAX contains in-line documentation that can be displayed as follows:

    % ./max.pl --help

Use this information to learn how to run MAX.  The source code to MAX also contains information
that might be useful.
